{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \{112521348170 \{00 Times-Roman;\} \{;255255255;\} 144014401080084000 720 720240\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 030 0 000 The brain has always been described by means of techno- logical metaphors: as an apparatus relaying excitation with the precision of a mirror reflecting light, as a hydraulic pump driving animal spirits into the muscles, as a central telephone exchange connecting or cutting off communica- tion; in the digital age, as a computer running its programs. These metaphors, as Catherine Malabou remarks, proceed from a centralizing concept of the brain seen as a machine that works from the top down, that orders movement, con- trols behavior, and brings about a unity of mind, conscious- ness, and man. In an earlier day, this centralizing and unifying vision truly represented an ideal of governance: one sole leader, one sole head commanding and organizing everything. We recall the difficulties faced during the Napo- leonic era by Franz Josef Gall. His system, subdividing the mind into faculties distributed among different areas of the brain, was seen by the ruling powers as a threat to the unity and stability of the state. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 Brain plasticity shatters this concept. The machine learns, differentiates itself, reconstructs itself. Briefly put, it privileges the event over the law. Omnipresent plasticity changes our view of the brain and its functioning. But Ma- labou goes further, seeking to show that the transition from a wired brain to a plastic brain is really the transition from a '91'91brain-machine'92'92 to a '91'91brain-world.'92'92 According to her, this change in perspective would affect not merely the model of cerebral functioning but also the concept we forge of ourselves and our social organization. The new model of the brain progressively elucidated by modern neuroscience emerges in a particular context: it co-occurs with a radical modification of the economic and social environment. The look of capitalism has changed, passing from a planned sys- tem, managed from above and overseen by a central author- ity, to an auto-organization at once dynamic, multipolar, and adaptive to circumstance. This new model of organiza- tion clearly suggests an analogy with cerebral reality: '91'91Like neuronal cohesion, contemporary corporate economic and social organization is not of a central or centralizing type but rests on a plurality of mobile and atomistic centers, de- ployed according to a connectionist model'92'92 (p.\u160?42). Might we have a '91'91neo-liberal'92'92 brain that would impose its model on our socioeconomic organization? Or, inversely, might the global economy'92s upheaval generate a conceptual change that would affect, by contagion, our view of the way the brain functions? 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 The analogy between the functioning of a modern busi- ness enterprise and a brain is truly striking: in both cases, decision-making centers are distributed, and networks undo and recompose themselves according to tasks to be accomplished and goals to be realized. But this analogy has limits: in the brain, delocalization is not total, or, rather, localization is not fortuitous. It depends upon a connective organization emplaced at the embryonic phase. Each re- gion, of the cortex in particular, therefore possesses a de facto specialization, determined by its connections and its position in the information-processing line. Thus the perti- nent model would have a character more subsidiary than pluricompetent. Pathological focal lesions show that the al- teration of a particular function (language processing, for example) can leave others intact (music processing). Simi- larly, the reuse of an intact zone to supplement a lesional zone works in very limited ways. Restoring a damaged net- work through a substitutive operation comes at the price of despecialization and performance loss. In the case of a sys- temic illness giving rise to depression, despecialization man- ifests itself as disaffiliation, a rupture in the social bond, placing the individual outside the network. Malabou rightly draws a parallel between illnesses of social connection, such as depression, and neurodegenerative illnesses, such as Alz- heimer'92s dementia. Both cases involve a disconnection from the rest of the network. In one case, reconnection is possi- ble; in the other, it is not. This is how dementia appears as the countermodel of plasticity: the irreparable loss of con- nections at the core of the cerebral network entails a defini- tive disconnection from the social network. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 The analogy between cerebral organization and socioeco- nomic organization should thus, at the very least, lead us to an awareness of the relation between the subject and his brain. Abandoning the thesis of a rigid, predetermined, di- recting organ for the thesis of a supple, adaptable, plastic organ permits the political emancipation of the brain, the transition from a '91'91soviet'92'92 to a '91'91liberal'92'92 brain. But what is the consequence of this conceptual reversal for each indi- vidual? The brain itself has not changed. Humans in the Middle Ages, the Industrial Revolution, and the liberal rev- olution all have had the same brain, with the same capaci- ties for learning and adaptation. What changes is the organization of society, the outcome of organizational forces and macroscopic interactions over which the brain has little influence. Thus the problem is, rather, that of un- derstanding how an individual brain can respond to the challenges of its social environment. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 Malabou positions her book at the center of this ques- tioning. For her, the brain makes possible the fundamental organic coherence of our personality, our self. The self is the result, the reflection, of the ordered functioning of the neuronal networks comprising the brain. This, in the end, guarantees the internal coherence of our representations. By guaranteeing the synthesis of the neuronal and the mental, the brain regulates the homeostasis of our mental states, just as, on another level, we have a regulation of the internal milieu maintaining the unity of the organism. We clearly have no consciousness of the plastic mechanisms forming our personality and guaranteeing its continuity. Yet by try- ing to become conscious of them we may, Malabou pro- poses, acquire a new freedom, that of imposing our own organization on the world rather than submitting to the in- fluences of a milieu. Plasticity, in effect, is not flexibility. Let us not forget that plasticity is a mechanism for adapting, while flexibility is a mechanism for submitting. Adapting is not submitting, and, in this sense, plasticity ought not to serve as an alibi for submitting to the new world order being dreamed up by capitalism. '91'91Not to replicate the cari- cature of the world: this is what we should do with our brain'92'92 (p.\u160?78). To be conscious of the plasticity of one'92s brain is to give oneself the means to say no.\line \line 720240\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 34 0 000 Plasticity and Flexibility'97For a Consciousness of the Brain 0024 000\line 720240\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 0 000 The brain is a work, and we do not know it. We are its subjects'97authors and products at once'97and we do not know it. '91'91Humans make their own history, but they do not know that they make it,'92'92 says Marx, intending thereby to awaken a consciousness of historicity. In a certain way, such words apply precisely to our context and object: '91'91Humans make their own brain, but they do not know that they make it.'92'92 It is not a question of effecting a tricky rhetorical move by corrupting this fine phrase for the benefit of our analysis or of acceding to the facility of a formal analogy. Quite the contrary, the bond between brain and history'97concepts long taken to be antithetical'97is now established with certainty. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 The structural bond here is so deep that in a certain sense it defines an 000 identity 0 000 . It'92s not just that the brain has a his- tory'97which is sometimes confused with that of its consti- tution as an object of the sciences'97but that it 000 is 0 000 a history. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 In fact, today we can say that there exists a constitutive his- toricity of the brain. The aim of this book is precisely to awaken a consciousness of this historicity. It is no longer important to ask whether brain and consciousness are one and the same thing'97let us put aside this old and specious debate. Instead we must constitute this strange critical en- tity, at once philosophical, scientific, and political, that would be a 000 consciousness of the brain 0 000 . It is to the constitution of this new genre'97open to everyone'97that the question 000 What should we do with our brain? 0 000 invites us. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 We have not yet assimilated the results of the revolution- ary discoveries made over the last fifty years in neurosci- ences (that is to say, the group of disciplines that study the anatomy, physiology, and functioning of the central ner- vous system, or CNS 16 000 8 1 30 000 0 ), results that contribute more every day to the refutation of erroneous yet nonetheless mysteri- ously persistent pictures we still have of the brain. Already in 1979, in the preface to his book 000 Neuronal Man 0 000 , Jean- Pierre Changeux declared that our knowledge in the field of neurosciences had experienced 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 an expansion matched only by the growth of physics at the beginning of the century and molecular biology in the 1950s. The impact of the discovery of the syn- apse and its functions is comparable to that of the atom or DNA. A new world is emerging, and the time seems ripe to open this field of knowledge to a wider public than the specialists and, if possible, to share the researchers'92 enthusiasm. 16 000 8 2 24 000 0\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 But this communication, this opening to the public at large, this sharing of enthusiasm, never took place. Twenty- five years later, the assessment remains the same: '91'91The im- passe on the topic of the brain is, with few exceptions, otal.'92'92 16 000 8 3 30 000 0 Even if many things have changed, even if the neu- rosciences have become '91'91cutting-edge'92'92 disciplines, even if medical imaging has made palpable progress, even if the '91'91cognitive sciences'92'92 have attained the status of autonomous disciplines, 16 000 8 4 30 000 0 and even if the number of articles about the CNS in the mainstream press has multiplied, neuronal man still has no consciousness. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 In this sense, we are still foreign to ourselves, at the threshold of this '91'91new world,'92'92 which we fail to realize makes up our very intimacy itself. '91'91We'92'92 have no idea who '91'91we'92'92 are, no idea what is inside '91'91us.'92'92 Of course, we have all heard people talk about neurons, synapses, connections, networks, different types of memory. Everyone knows about neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer'92s or Parkinson'92s. Many of us have seen, in hospitals, the output screen of a functional neural-imaging machine. Some of us know that today it is possible, thanks to new MRI and PET technologies, 16 000 8 5 30 000 0 to observe the brain 000 in vivo 0 000 , in real time. Everyone says that psychoanalysis is losing importance, and everyone hears talk, right or wrong, about how the only ef- fective cure for nervous depression is the chemical kind. We all know about MAOIs or SSRIs; 16 000 8 6 30 000 0 we are vaguely familiar with the words 000 serotonin 0 000 , 000 noradrenalin 0 000 , and 000 neurotransmit- ter 0 000 , and we all know about the neuronal origin of tobacco or drug addiction. We know that it is now possible to suc- cessfully transplant a hand and that the brain can reconsti- tute its bodily schema to include foreign members. We have heard about a certain ability on the part of the nervous sys- tem to repair, at least partially, some of the damage it sus- tains. The word 000 resilience 0 000 is not unknown to us. 16 000 8 7 24 000 0\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 The problem is that we do not see the link that unifies all these phenomena, names, and situations, which are here purposefully listed completely at random and appear to have nothing in common with one another. This link exists nonetheless and is tied to the activity of the brain, to its manner of developing itself, of working, of 000 doing 0 000 . This link is tied to its meaning as a 000 work 0 000 , our work, and as history, our history, and as a singular destiny, our destiny. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 The work proper to the brain that engages with history and individual experience has a name: 000 plasticity 0 000 . What we have called the constitutive historicity of the brain is really nothing other than its plasticity. 000 The plasticity of the CNS, nervous plasticity, neuronal plasticity, synaptic plasticity 0 000 '97we run into this word in every neurology department of every medical school and of every university hospital, in the name of every neuroscientific research team 16 000 8 8 30 000 0 '97it jumps out at us, in its many occurrences, every time we look under the word 000 brain 0 000 in the library. It constitutes the name of a specific dis- cipline in scientific journals. 16 000 8 9 30 000 0 This frequency and omnipres- ence are not at all contingent. In fact, plasticity is the dominant concept of the neurosciences. Today it consti- tutes their common point of interest, their dominant motif, and their privileged operating model, to the extent that it allows them to think about and describe the brain as at once an unprecedented dynamic, structure, and organization. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 Our brain is plastic, and we do not know it. We are com- pletely ignorant of this dynamic, this organization, and this structure. We continue to believe in the '91'91'91rigidity'92 of an entirely genetically determined brain,'92'92 16 000 8 10 30 000 0 about which it is obviously completely in vain to ask: 000 What should we do with this 0 000 ? Even the very word 000 brain 0 000 frightens us: we don'92t under- stand anything about it'97all these phenomena, all these folds, ridges, valleys, localizations, this jargon that describes (we imagine) a series of fixed, indeed genetically pro- grammed, entities, without any suppleness, without any improvisational ability. We don'92t understand this organiza- tion, which gives rise to so many unsettling metaphors in the register of command and government: a controller that sends orders down from on high, a central telephone ex- change, a computer . . . all of this cybernetic frigidity, which only serves to alienate us from consciousness, 16 000 8 11 30 000 0 itself the only sign of life and liberty in a domain of implacable organic necessity, where movement and grace seem to be reduced to mere reflex. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 Meanwhile, plasticity directly contradicts rigidity. It is its exact antonym. In ordinary speech, it designates supple- ness, a faculty for adaptation, the ability to evolve. Accord- ing to its etymology'97from the Greek 000 plassein 0 000 , to mold '97the word 000 plasticity 0 000 has two basic senses: it means at once the capacity to 000 receive form 0 000 (clay is called '91'91plastic,'92'92 for ex- ample) and the capacity to 000 give form 0 000 (as in the plastic arts or in plastic surgery). Talking about the plasticity of the brain thus amounts to thinking of the brain as something modifiable, '91'91formable,'92'92 and formative at the same time. Brain plasticity operates, as we shall see, on three levels: (1) the modeling of neuronal connections (developmental plas- ticity in the embryo and the child); (2) the modification of neuronal connections (the plasticity of synaptic modulation throughout life); and (3) the capacity for repair (post- lesional plasticity). '91'91Plasticity in the nervous system means an alteration in structure or function brought about by de- velopment, experience, or injury.'92'92 16 000 8 12 24 000 0\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 But it must be remarked that plasticity is also the capac- ity to annihilate the very form it is able to receive or create. We should not forget that 000 plastique 0 000 , from which we get the words 000 plastiquage 0 000 and 000 plastiquer 0 000 , 16 000 8 13 30 000 0 is an explosive substance made of nitroglycerine and nitrocellulose, capable of caus- ing violent explosions. We thus note that plasticity is situated between two extremes: on the one side the sensible image of taking form (sculpture or plastic objects), and on the other side that of the annihilation of all form (explosion). The word 000 plasticity 0 000 thus unfolds its meaning between sculptural molding and deflagration, which is to say explo- sion. From this perspective, to talk about the plasticity of the brain means to see in it not only the creator and receiver of form but also an agency of disobedience to every consti- tuted form, a refusal to submit to a model. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 Let us dwell for a moment on the modeling of neuronal connections, made possible by our individual experience, skills, and life habits, by the power of 000 impression 0 000 of existence in general. We can now see that the plasticity of the brain, understood in this sense, corresponds well to the possibility of fashioning by memory, to the capacity to shape a history. While the central nervous system'92s power for change is par- ticularly clear during the developmental stage, we know for certain that the ability to learn, to acquire new skills and new memories, is maintained throughout life. And this is true 000 in a different way from one individual to the next 0 000 . The capacity of each to receive and to create his or her own form does not depend on any pre-established form; the original model or standard is, in a way, progressively erased. 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 Synaptic efficacy grows or declines under the impact of strictly individual experience. The synapse'97from the Greek 000 sunapsis 0 000 , '91'91liaison, juncture'92'92'97is the region of contact or connection between two neurons. The neuron, an ele- mentary unit of nervous tissue, can be divided into three parts: the cellular body (protoplasm), the dendrites, and the axon, which are its extensions. It is by means of these exten- sions that connections (synapses) are established between two neurons. Dendrites, along with the cellular body, con- stitute what we call the 000 postsynaptic 0 000 side of the neuron. (This is where connections coming from '91'91upstream'92'92 neu- rons arrive.) The axon constitutes the 000 presynaptic 0 000 part of the neuron: its endpoints are in contact with other '91'91down- stream'92'92 neurons. 16 000 8 14 30 000 0 Marc Jeannerod explains: If a synapse belongs to a circuit in frequent use, it tends to grow in volume, its permeability increases, and its efficacy increases. Inversely, a little-used syn- apse tends to become less efficacious. The theory of synaptic efficacy thus allows us to explain the gradual molding of a brain under the influence of individual experience, to the point of making it possible for us, in principle, to account for the individual characteris- tics and particularities of each brain. We are dealing here with a mechanism of individuation that makes each brain a unique object despite its adherence to a common model. 16 000 8 15 24 000 0\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 30 000 In this sense'97we know this by now'97the brain of a pianist is not strictly identical to that of a mathematician, a mechanic, or a graphic artist. But it is obviously not just a person'92s '91'91trade'92'92 or '91'91specialty'92'92 that matters here. The entire identity of the individual is in play: her past, her surround- ings, her encounters, her activities; in a word, the ability that our brain'97that every brain'97has to adapt itself, to in- clude modifications, to receive shocks, and to create anew on the basis of this very reception. It is precisely because'97 contrary to what we normally think'97the brain is not al- ready made that we must ask what we should do with it, what we should do with this plasticity that makes us, pre- cisely in the sense of a work: sculpture, modeling, architec- ture. What should we do with this plastic organic art? It is already known that '91'91synaptic plasticity, continuing throughout learning, throughout development as well as adulthood, sculpts each of our brains. Education, experi- ence, and training make each brain a unique work.'92'92 16 000 8 16 30 000 0 What should we do with all this potential within us? What should we do with this genetically free field? What should we do with this idea of a truly 000 living 0 000 brain (modification of synap- tic efficacy, as we will see, is already implicated in the most elementary level of animal life, and thus appears today to be one of the fundamental characteristics of living beings), a fragile brain, which depends on us as much as we depend on it'97the dizzying reciprocity of reception, donation, and suspension of form that outlines the new structure of consciousness? 24 000\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 30 000 We can now understand why Jean-Pierre Changeux claims that the '91'91discovery of the synapse and its functions'92'92 was as revolutionary as the discovery of DNA: the former brings to the latter a level of precision and a modification so significant that it seems almost to contradict it. Brain plasticity constitutes a possible margin of improvisation with regard to genetic necessity. Today it is no longer chance versus necessity, but chance, necessity, and plastic- ity'97which is neither the one nor the other. '91'91We know,'92'92 says Changeux, '91'91that the power of genes assures the perpet- uation of broad traits of [cerebral] organization, such as the form of the brain and of its circumvolutions, the organiza- tion of its areas and the general architecture of cerebral tis- sue. . . . But considerable variability . . . remains despite the genes'92 power.'92'92 16 000 8 17 30 000 0 If neuronal function is an event or should bring about events, this is so precisely because it is itself able to create events, to eventualize [ 000 0\par}
}
